Landfast Sea Ice: Explore, Characterize, and Document (#1)
ua-snap/ardac-curation: seaice/landfast_eda.md

# "The Landfast Sea Ice Data"
## Objective

> The purpose of this document is a high-level distillation of the progress made toward identifying, collecting, and curating "the landfast sea ice data" for integration into the Arctic Data Collaborative (ARDAC). This document describes the current understanding of the data proposes the next step forward in making these data more broadly accessible and useful with the ultimate aim of to a wider variety of end-users.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The purpose of this document is a high-level distillation of the progress made toward identifying, collecting, and curating "the landfast sea ice data" for integration into the Arctic Data Collaborative (ARDAC). This document describes the current understanding of the data and proposes the next step forward in making these data more broadly accessible and useful with the ultimate aim of a wider variety of end-users.
```

## Background
An initial exploratory data analysis has been completed for two similar but incongruent archives of landfast sea ice data. The first archive are the "[Recurring Spring Leads and Landfast Ice in the Beaufort and Chukchi Seas](https://nsidc.org/data/g02173/versions/1)" data that are hosted by the NSIDC. The second archive are the data preserved locally on the SNAP file system. These data will hereafter be referred to as "ths NSIDC data" and "the InteRFACE data" for brevity. Note that the NSIDC data contain another sea ice variable: leads. The leads data are intentionally omitted from the discussion here.

### What is Landfast Sea Ice?

> Landfast ice is sea ice that is mostly stationary and attached to land. Specifically, landfast ice is defined here as being continguous to the coast and lacking detectable motion for approximately 20 days. This defintion is consistent with the that provided by [Mahoney et al. (2005)](https://seaice.alaska.edu/gi/publications/mahoney/Mahoney_2005_POAC_DefiningLFI.pdf) and [Mahoney et al. (2007)](https://agupubs.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1029/2006JC003559), and the landfast sea ice data in InteRFACE data are the same data analyzed in the 2007 publication.

Reviewer: Again, really awesome sleuthing, here.

### Why Care About Landfast Sea Ice?
From Mahoney et al. (2007):

> >In the Arctic, landfast sea ice is a key element of the coastal system, integral to a wide range of geological and biological processes as well as human activities. The presence of landfast ice can mitigate the effect of winter storms on the coast but also impede navigation in the spring. As well as being of great importance to native subsistence activities [Nelson, 1969; George et al., 2004], the presence or absence of landfast in northern Alaska and its stability are of considerable economic importance for offshore development.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
>In the Arctic, landfast sea ice is a key element of the coastal system, integral to a wide range of geological and biological processes as well as human activities. The presence of landfast ice can mitigate the effect of winter storms on the coast but also impede navigation in the spring. As well as being of great importance to native subsistence activities [Nelson, 1969; George et al., 2004], the presence or absence of landfast ice in northern Alaska and its stability are of considerable economic importance for offshore development.
```

Blown away by all of this info you've compiled and how you've presented it!

### Source Data Attributes

> The landfast ice data are derived from RADARSAT-1 data aquired using the the moderate-resolution ScanSAR operation mode of the synthetic aperture radar (SAR) sensor. The RADARSAT-1 mission (no longer active) used a C-Band (5.3 GHz), 5.6 cm wavelength, HH polarized microwave frequency to image the earth. RADARSAT-1 could "detect" landfast ice because it has a distinct backscatter signature compared to surrounding pack ice, land, or open water. Indiviudal ScarSAR passes were mosaiced together to generate a mosaic evry two or three days resulting in 8 to 35 mosaics per annual ice cycle. Data processing details are provided by [Eicken et al. (2006)](https://nsidc.org/sites/nsidc.org/files/files/data/noaa/g02173/eicken_leads_landfast_2006.pdf).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The landfast ice data are derived from RADARSAT-1 data aquired using the the moderate-resolution ScanSAR operation mode of the synthetic aperture radar (SAR) sensor. The RADARSAT-1 mission (no longer active) used a C-Band (5.3 GHz), 5.6 cm wavelength, HH polarized microwave frequency to image the earth. RADARSAT-1 could "detect" landfast ice because it has a distinct backscatter signature compared to surrounding pack ice, land, or open water. Indiviudal ScarSAR passes were mosaicked together to generate a mosaic every two or three days resulting in 8 to 35 mosaics per annual ice cycle. Data processing details are provided by [Eicken et al. (2006)](https://nsidc.org/sites/nsidc.org/files/files/data/noaa/g02173/eicken_leads_landfast_2006.pdf).
```

### InteRFACE Data
There are 216 GeoTIFF landfast ice extent files for the Chukchi region and 250 for the Beaufort region.. A sample of these data appear in Figures 2 and 3. Note that the data values for these scenes are different than what is in the NSIDC data. These data lack a consistent set of unique values. My interpretations of the raster vales are as follows:

 - 0: No SLIE is present for this pixel. This means either water, or sea ice that is not landfast.
 - 63, 64, 111, or some other value between 0 and 128: No data.
 - 128: A landmask. The landmask appears constant across each GeoTiff sampled thus far.
 - 255: Landfast Sea Ice

Monthly statistical summary rasters, annual stacks, and vectorized ice edge products are also available in this archive.

| ![Chukchi SLIE](chukchi_slie.png)|
|:--:|
| <i>Figure 2. Nine random samples of the InteRFACE Chukchi landfast ice extent data. The date of each scene is in the format YYYY-DOY-DOY.</i>|

| ![Beaufort SLIE](beaufort_slie.png)|
|:--:|
| <i>Figure 3. Nine random samples of the InteRFACE Beaufort landfast ice extent data. The date of each scene is in the format YYYY-DOY-DOY.</i>|

## Recommendation for ARDAC Integration

> I recommend we prioritize create a unified landfast ice extent datacube for ingest into ARDAC via an integration with our array geodatabase (Rasdaman) and SNAP Data API. A discrete daily time index will serve as the "third dimension" of this datacube and be a mechanism by which users can request, slice, and access data. This will require mapping the DOY ranges provided by the GeoTIFF file names to this index to control for which data (Chukchi, Beaufort, both) are available for which times. This effort will also require determining the extent to which the NSDIC (Figure 1) and the InteRFACE-Beaufort (Figure 3) datasets are indentical. As there are different numbers of GeoTIFFs available from each, it is possible that one is a subset of the other. Whereever we are fusing the the InteRFACE data with the NSIDC data we'll need to prescribe a common set of categorical integer encodings (e.g., 128 is always the landmask). The ultimate outcome would be for a user to be able to query the dataset by a date or set of dates and retreive an internally consistent set of whatever landfast sea ice data exists for that period. In my opinion this work would represent a substantial upgrade to the accessiblty and usability of these datasets for technical users.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
I recommend we prioritize creating a unified landfast ice extent datacube for ingest into ARDAC via an integration with our array geodatabase (Rasdaman) and SNAP Data API. A discrete daily time index will serve as the "third dimension" of this datacube and be a mechanism by which users can request, slice, and access data. This will require mapping the DOY ranges provided by the GeoTIFF file names to this index to control for which data (Chukchi, Beaufort, both) are available for which times. This effort will also require determining the extent to which the NSDIC (Figure 1) and the InteRFACE-Beaufort (Figure 3) datasets are identical. As there are different numbers of GeoTIFFs available from each, it is possible that one is a subset of the other. Wherever we are fusing the InteRFACE data with the NSIDC data we'll need to prescribe a common set of categorical integer encodings (e.g., 128 is always the landmask). The ultimate outcome would be for a user to be able to query the dataset by a date or set of dates and retrieve an internally consistent set of whatever landfast sea ice data exists for that period. In my opinion this work would represent a substantial upgrade to the accessibility and usability of these datasets for technical users.
```

Excellent.
